textOutput=An extract from 'The Little Mother'
The little scene made an extraordinary impression on Joan.  She was over-wrought, and it seemed to her to have something of the quality of a religious dedication, as though it were a taking of vows.
When she stood with her father and sisters by the grave on the hillside over Cork Harbour, she promised the dead woman that she would try to be everything she had been to them.  She had no illusions about herself.  She knew her mother had been a creature apart, whose innocence had kept her emotions always fresh and beautiful.  Joan felt sure that she had no such innocence, but she thought that maybe she might have character, an the thought filled her with a certain mournful pride.  It was though within a few days  her whole nature had changed: as though she no longer had a father and sisters, only a husband and children; as though, in fact, her girlhood had suddenly stopped.
For months their little house was gloomy and dark.  It had something to do with the deep vein of sentimentality in them all.  Suddenly one of the girls would forget herself while washing clothes in the kitchen and start to hum some song of their mother's and as suddenly stop in the middle of a bar.  Then would follow a few intolerable moments of widening comprehension that would end in tears.
But it couldn't go on like that.  However Joan's thoughts might wander, meals had to be cooked, laundry had to be done, bills had to be paid.  And though the house and furniture were now all that was left of her mother, they too were responsibilities, and they too had to be changed.
The house was old, and it was old-fashioned, and nothing in it had been altered in the twenty-odd years of her parents' marriage.  There was still only gas in the front room, and the furniture, bought second-hand at auctions in houses three times the size, was a joke.  Joan was ashamed that they didn't have a bathroom.  It struck her as all wrong in a family of girls that fellows would be walking through the kitchen, seeing things they shouldn't see and coming in with big bumps on their foreheads after finding their way to the lavatory.  Above all, she wanted to get rid of the range from the kitchen and make it into a comfortable living room.  Mick did wire the house for electricity, but he made excuses about the bathroom and kitchen, and she knew she must go slowly with him because every change would seem to him like a betrayal of her mother.  He wanted to die among the things that had been hers.  Joan wanted to make a new life for them all. 
&textTitle=Extract: 'The Little Mother'